"""
ABSTRACT
In recent years, people are seeking for a solution to improve text
summarization for Thai language. Although several solutions such
as PageRank, Graph Rank, Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
models, etc., have been proposed, research results in Thai text
summarization were restricted due to limited corpus in Thai
language with complex grammar. This paper applied a text
summarization system for Thai travel news based on keyword
scored in Thai language by extracting the most relevant sentences
from the original document. We compared LSA and Non-negative
Matrix Factorization (NMF) to find the algorithm that is suitable
with Thai travel news. The suitable compression rates for Generic
Sentence Relevance score (GRS) and K-means clustering were also
evaluated. From these experiments, we concluded that keyword
scored calculation by LSA with sentence selection by GRS is the
best algorithm for summarizing Thai Travel News, compared with
human with the best compression rate of 20%.
CCS Concepts
• Information systems ➝ Information retrieval ➝ Retrieval
tasks and goals➝ Summarization
Keywords
Text summarization; extractive summarization; non-negative
matrix factorization

1. INTRODUCTION
Daily newspaper has abundant of data that users do not have
enough time for reading them. It is difficult to identify the relevant
information to satisfy the information needed by users. Automatic
summarization can reduce the problem of information overloading
and it has been proposed previously in English and other languages.
However, there were only a few research results in Thai text
summarization due to the lack of corpus in Thai language and the
complicated grammar.
Text Summarization [1] is a technique for summarizing the content
of the documents. 
It consists of three steps: 
1) create an intermediate representation of the input text, 
2) calculate score for the sentences based on the concepts, and 
3) choose important sentences to be included in the summary. Text summarization can
be divided into 2 approaches. The first approach is the extractive
summarization, which relies on a method for extracting words and
searching for keywords from the original document. The second
approach is the abstractive summarization, which analyzes words
by linguistic principles with transcription or interpretation from the
original document. This approach implies more effective and
accurate summary than the extractive methods. However, with the
lack of Thai corpus, we chose to apply an extractive summarization
method for Thai text summarization.
This research focused on the sentence extraction function based on
keyword score calculation then selecting important sentences based
on the Generic Sentence Relevance score (GRS), calculated from
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) and Non-negative Matrix
Factorization (NMF). We also tried using K-means clustering for
document summarization. In this experiment, we compared 5
models for 5 rounds with Thai travel news using the compression
rates of 20%, 30% and 40% and reported the rate and method that
produced the best result from the experiment.
2. RELATED WORKS
In recent years, several models in Thai Text summarization have
been introduced. Suwanno, N. et al. [2] proposed a Thai text
summarization that extracted a paragraph from a document based
on Thai compound nouns, term frequency method, and headline
score for generating a summary. Chongsuntornsri, A., et al. [3]
proposed a new approach for Text summarization in Thai based on
content- and graph-based with the use of Topic Sensitive PageRank
algorithm for summarizing and ranking of text segments.
Jaruskulchai C., et al. [4] proposed a method to summarize
documents by extracting important sentences from combining the
specific properties (Local Property) and the overall properties
(Global Property) of the sentences. The overall properties were
based on the relationship between sentences in the document. From
their experiments, the summarization of the industrial news got
60% precision, 44% recall, and 50.9% F-measure, the general news
got the 51.8% precision, 38.5% recall, and 43.1% F-measure while
the fashion magazines got 53.0% precision, 33.0% recall, and
40.4% F-measure.